1. Humans really like to hunt things until they no longer exist. For 10 points each:
[10] Hunted to extinction in the 1870's, this equine, a subspecies of the plain zebra, possesses distinctive stripes only on the front half of its body. A South Africa-based project is attempting to selectively re-breed it from extinction.
ANSWER: Equus quagga quagga
[10] Although Dutch explorers thought they were less tasty than pigeons, these birds were hunted to extinction anyway. These large flightless birds are believed to have had a grey-brown plumage.
ANSWER: dodos [or Raphus cucullatus]
[10] The Atlas subspecies of these carnivores were hunted to extinction by the Romans. The "sun", "sloth", and "spectacled" species are all vulnerable to extinction.
ANSWER: bears [or Ursidae]
CATEGORY: History

2. Dr. Rieux chronicles the outbreak of an epidemic a novel set in this country. For 10 points each:
[10] Name this country home to the author of Nedjma, Kateb Yacine. It is the birthplace of the author of The Plague and The Stranger, Albert Camus.
ANSWER: Algeria
[10] After falling sick during his honeymoon in Algeria, Michel finds himself falling for young boys in this French author's The Immoralist. He also wrote about Bernard and Olivier in The Counterfeiters.
ANSWER: Andre Gide
[10] Gide wrote a number of works about this writer, whose novel The Possessed was adapted into a play by Camus. He's better known for writing The Brothers Karamazov and Crime and Punishment.
ANSWER: Fyodor Dostoevsky
CATEGORY: Literature

3. One of the three gunpowder empires, it established Shia as the state religion. For 10 points each:
[10] Identify this state founded by Shah Ismail I which started off in Azerbaijan but ended up conquering all of Persia. It constantly clashed with the Ottomans over its western border.
ANSWER: Safavid Empire
[10] This Safavid ruler modernized the military with the help of two Englishmen, Robert and Anthony Sherley, and moved the capital to Isfahan. He sent ambassadors to Europe in an attempt to form an alliance against the Ottomans.
ANSWER: Shah Abbas I
[10] The Safavid Empire relied heavily on these tribal warriors in forming its army. The influence of these warriors waned after Shah Abbas created a large standing army loyal to him first. Even then however, they made up about half of army.
ANSWER: Qizilbash
CATEGORY: History

4. They are structured around modes, such as Dorian or Lydian. For 10 points each:
[10] Name this type of medieval liturgical music, always entirely vocal and monophonic. It was notated using neumes and was named after a Roman pope.
ANSWER: Gregorian chant [prompt on partial; accept plainchant or plainsong]
[10] The melismatic, monophonic influences of Gregorian chant can be seen in this 12th century German composer's works. Her Ordo Virtutum may have been the first morality play, and her other works include texts on medicine and her visions.
ANSWER: Saint Hildegard von Bingen
[10] Secular music finally arrived during the Renaissance in the form of this type of choral composition related to the chanson and the motet. Giovanni Palestrina wrote many of them and Claudio Monteverdi wrote nine books of them.
ANSWER: madrigals
CATEGORY: Fine Arts

5. Name some things about crystallography for 10 points each:
[10] This effect, in which waves bend around objects they encounter, can result in interference patterns that are typically analyzed in crystallography.
ANSWER: diffraction
[10] This last name is shared by a father-son pair that formulated a namesake law of X-ray diffraction. It gives the angle of scattering from a crystal lattice as a function of wavelength and distance between lattice planes.
ANSWER: Bragg
[10] This German's namesake conjecture states that the densest sphere packings are face-centered cubic or hexagonal close-packed. He also proposed a planetary theory of nested Platonic solids.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
CATEGORY: Science

6. He is the father of the Fenrir and the Midgard serpent. For 10 points each:
[10] This Norse god of trickery and mischief is the son of a jotunn and the only god to fight on their side at Ragnarok.
ANSWER: Loki
[10] This god of beauty's mother, Frigg, obtains an oath from every object on the Earth not to harm this god, except for mistletoe. His home, Breidablik, is the fairest hall in the world.
ANSWER: Baldur
[10] Loki gave an arrow of mistletoe to this blind god, with which he slew his brother, Baldur. He is eventually killed by Vali, the son of Odin and a giantess.
ANSWER: Hodur [accept Hod]
CATEGORY: Literature

7. While working for the ACLU, this attorney participated in two "trials of the century". For 10 points each:
[10] Name this defense attorney for the Sweet and Massie Trials who came out of retirement to help defend a teacher accused of breaching the Butler Act.
ANSWER: Clarence Seward Darrow
[10] Darrow called the prosecutor William Jennings Bryan to the stand to testify on the Bible during this trial, in which a Tennessee school teacher was arrested for teaching evolution in class.
ANSWER: Tennessee v. Scopes or Scopes Monkey Trial
[10] Darrow also defended these two Chicago teens who attempted to commit a perfect crime by murdering Bobby Franks. Darrow had them both plead guilty and successfully argued for a life sentence instead of the death penalty.
ANSWER: Nathan Freudenthal Leopold, Jr. and Richard Albert Loeb [both parts required]
CATEGORY: History

8. While Death wins his crewmates' lives, the title character of this poem is claimed by Life-in-Death. For 10 points each:
[10] Identify this poem about a sailor who stops the Wedding-Guest and tells him about his regret over shooting an albatross.
ANSWER: The Rime of the Ancient Mariner
[10] This poet of Christabel, the conversation poems, and The Rime of the Ancient Mariner was supposedly interrupted by "a person from Porlock" while writing about Xanadu in "Kubla Khan".
ANSWER: Samuel Taylor Coleridge
[10] In this conversation poem written about Sara Hutchinson, Coleridge described "a grief without a pang, void, dark, and drear" that causes his "genial spirits [to] fail".
ANSWER: "Dejection: An Ode"
CATEGORY: Literature

9. For 10 points, answer the following questions about British film.
[10] This 2010 film starred Colin Firth as King George VI as he works to overcome his stutter with the help of a speech therapist. It won seven British Academy Film Awards, including Best Picture.
ANSWER: The King's Speech
[10] This actor played the speech therapist Lionel Logue in The King's Speech. He is also known for playing the character of Barbosa in The Pirates of the Caribbean.   
ANSWER: Geoffrey Rush
[10] This actor was the Archbishop of Canterbury in the film. Though he appeared in the 2010 film Gladiator as Gracchus, he is primarily an accomplished stage actor, receiving a Tony for his work in Much Ado About Nothing.
ANSWER: Derek Jacobi
CATEGORY: Trash

10. Name some things about earthworks that were not prepared for fighting. For 10 points each:
[10] Identify this large earthwork designed by Robert Smithson and installed in the Great Salt Lake that was originally composed of black basalt rocks. It has become encrusted with salt, and has a pinkish coloration.
ANSWER: Spiral Jetty
[10] This British artist has created many earthworks on a much smaller scale than Smithson, including a sculpture composed of many icicles frozen together in a star and stones arranged in a geometric spiral. All of his works are made using found natural materials.
ANSWER: Andy Goldsworthy
[10] This prehistoric earthwork in Wiltshire includes a notable heelstone which marks the direction of sunrise on summer solstice and was originally used as a burial site. Several of the bluestones which had fallen down have been propped back up.
ANSWER: Stonehenge
CATEGORY: Fine Arts

11. To balance a half-reaction in acidic solution, H2O is added to one side of the equation while these particles are added to the other. For 10 points each:
[10] Name these cations donated by Bronsted-Lowry acids, which combine with water in solution to form hydronium ions.
ANSWER: protons [or H+ ions]
[10] This Swedish chemist was the first to propose an acid definition based on ionic theory. In this man's definition, acids produce H+ ions while bases produce OH- ions in solution.
ANSWER: Svante Arrhenius
[10] Aluminum trifluoride is defined to be a Lewis acid because it is able to accept this species. Lewis bases, including many anions, donate this species.
ANSWER: electron pair [or lone pair; prompt on partial]
CATEGORY: Science

12. It gained its independence following the success of William the Silent in the Eighty Years' War. For 10 points each:
[10] Name this European country whose aristocracy included the wealthy stadtholders. It is still ruled by the House of Orange.
ANSWER: the Netherlands
[10] During the Dutch Golden Age, demand for this commodity led to an economic bubble. Ones which were "broken", such as the Semper Augustus, were especially valuable. A single bulb of this plant could fetch 10 years worth of a master craftsman's wages.
ANSWER: tulips
[10] During the Golden Age, the Dutch had exclusive access to the ports of this nation. A trading post was established Dejima, from which the Dutch sold many Western novelties and demonstrated various technologies.
ANSWER: Japan
CATEGORY: History

13. In this work, the titular character is cursed for daydreaming about her lover, literally. For 10 points each:
[10] Name this play in which King Dushyanta is cursed to completely forget his wife. They are united again years later when fisherman finds his ring, the only item that can break the curse.
ANSWER: The Recognition of Shakuntala [or Abhignanasakuntalam]
[10] This 5th century CE poet and dramatist wrote The Cloud Messenger and The Recognition of Shakuntala.
ANSWER: Kalidasa
[10] This ancient Indo-Aryan language was used by Kalidasa, Bhasa, and Bharavi. It exists in the Vedic and classical form, the latter of which was used to write the Rig Veda.
ANSWER: Sanskrit
CATEGORY: Literature

14. Answer these questions about borders of continents for 10 points each.
[10] Along with Belize, this country is the border between North America and South America. Hurricanes Mitch and Stan occurred here, and its cities include Petapa, Mixco, and Villa Nueva.
ANSWER: Republic of Guatemala
[10] This mountain range dividing Europe and Asia lies west of Yekaterinburg. It begins at the Kara Sea and ends at the Kazakh Steppes. Its highest point is Mount Narodnaya. 
ANSWER: Ural Mountains
[10] This Egyptian-owned peninsula connects Asia and Africa. This peninsula is bordered to the east by the Gulf of Aqaba, while to its west is the Gulf of Suez.
ANSWER: Sinai Peninsula
CATEGORY: Geography

15. He composed the jazz standard In Your Own Sweet Way. For 10 points each:
[10] This jazz pianist and composer is responsible for the track Take Five, written in quintuple time. He recorded the album Paper Moon and 1963's At Carnegie Hall with his namesake Quartet.
ANSWER: David Warren Brubeck
[10] This cool jazz album, recorded in 1959 by Brubeck, features Blue Rondo a la Turk as the leading track. This album also contains Kathy's Waltz and the aforementioned Take Five.
ANSWER: Time Out
[10] Besides playing the alto saxophone in the David Brubeck Quartet, this man collaborated with Brubeck on numerous duets including their namesake album in 1975. He also composed many of the pieces including Take Five.
ANSWER: Paul Desmond [or Paul Emil Breitenfeld]
CATEGORY: Fine Arts

16. Identify some terms from computer science, for 10 points each.
[10] These change a program written in one language to another, usually lower-level language. These programs are commonly used to create an executable program.
ANSWER: compiler
[10] This interpreted, open-source, high-level language created by Guido van Rossum emphasizes readability. Named for a British TV show, this is the language that the visual novel engine Ren'Py is written in.
ANSWER: Python
[10] Although Python supports a number of other paradigms, it is often used as this type of language, whose namesake small programs automate tasks. Examples include the server-side PHP and Game Maker Language.
ANSWER: scripting language
CATEGORY: Science

17. Although not mentioned in the Qur'an, Muslims still perform this practice, known as Khitan. For 10 points each:
[10] Name this surgical action which Jesus underwent when he was 8 days old, which resulted in the Holy Prepuce. Some Indigenous Australians have this procedure as well as subincision as part of rites of passage.
ANSWER: circumcision
[10] This is the Jewish term for ritual circumcision, in which the kvatter carries the baby from the parents to the mohel. After this ceremony, participants are compelled to attend a seudat mitzvah.
ANSWER: brit milah or bris milah
[10] This prophet is a witness to all circumcisions and has a seat set aside for him at brit milah. He proves that Baal is a false god before leaving his mantle to his successor Elisha and ascending to heaven on a chariot of fire.
ANSWER: Elijah the Tishbite [or Eliyahu; or Elias]
CATEGORY: Religion

18. Supreme Court Justices have had some issues regarding speaking. For 10 points each:
[10] This early Chief Justice of the Supreme Court was nominated to the Court after having served as Secretary of State for John Adams. His opinion in Marbury v. Madison established the doctrine of judicial review and gave voice to the Court.
ANSWER: John Marshall
[10] This lawyer submitted a famous brief to the Court in the case of Muller v. Oregon arguing for special treatment for women. Justice McReynolds notably refused to speak with him after he was nominated to the Court.
ANSWER: Louis Brandeis
[10] This nominee of Lyndon B. Johnson had previously served as a vocal attorney for the NAACP on the case of Brown v. Board. His seat was filled by Clarence Thomas, who did not speak on the bench for several years and does not believe in interrupting oral arguments.
ANSWER: Thurgood Marshall
CATEGORY: History

19. One of the title characters escapes the Nazis in a coffin with the Prague Golem. For 10 points each:
[10] Name this work in which Joe, a Czech artist and refugee, and Sam, a gay office worker at Empire Novelty Company, publish a comic about the Escapist.
ANSWER: The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay
[10] This author of The Yiddish Policemen's Union and The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay wrote a work in which Art Bechstein finds himself falling for Arthur Lecomte.
ANSWER: Michael Chabon
[10] Art Bechstein appears in Chabon's The Mysteries of [this city]. It is also the setting of Chabon's Wonder Boys, a cycle of plays by August Wilson, and The Perks of Being a Wallflower.
ANSWER: Pittsburgh
CATEGORY: Literature

20. Name the following about an economic entity that can come in ad valorem and in rem. For 10 points each:
[10] These entities can be progressive or regressive. Before becoming savings, income is partitioned such that these are taken out and used to fund public-sector expenditures.
ANSWER: taxes
[10] At tax rates of 0 and 100 percent, this curve assumes that government revenue is zero. Its maxima represents the optimal tax rate.
ANSWER: Laffer curve
[10] This law states that, despite varying tax rates, federal tax revenues in the United States have remained at about 19.5 percent of GDP since World War II.
ANSWER: Hauser's Law
CATEGORY: Social Science

21. In his magnum opus, he undertakes the destruktion of previous concepts and introduces a whole new vocabulary. For 10 points each:
[10] Name this post-Kantian German philosopher, who argued that experience was grounded in intentionality and care. He coined the term Dasein to refer to a state of being that understands itself through its own existence.
ANSWER: Martin Heidegger
[10] This Heidegger work discusses viewing objects as a means to an end as being "ready-to-hand", as opposed to "present-at-hand". Heidegger never finished this work, so the part on the second title concept is incomplete. 
ANSWER: Being and Time [or Sein und Zeit]
[10] This existentialist has been accused of simply reintroducing the Cartesian ego to Heidegger's ideas. He is the author of the similarly titled Being and Nothingness, in which he espouses his ideas of authenticity and bad faith. 
ANSWER: Jean-Paul Sartre
CATEGORY: Philosophy